###Introduction

Many ecological patterns are scale dependant (citation).  Determining the scale over which a pattern is observed can inform scientists at what scales it is appropriate to use a pattern for prediction (citation).  Because ecological processes have varying importance depending on the scale of analysis, determining at what scales a pattern is observed can allow for stronger inference about what processes or mechanisms could be producing a given pattern (citation).

The nested subset pattern has been used by ecologists to understand how processes like colonization and extinction could create structure in a data matrix of species occurrence (presence and absence) across multiple sites.  If we take a data matrix of presences (ones) and absences (zeros) of species (columns) at sites (rows) and ordinate the matrix so that the most species rich sites are toward the top of the matrix and that species with the highest incidence (count of presences) are on the left side of the matrix, we will often observe a nested matrix with a triangle of presences (ones) in the upper left corner of the matrix.  A matrix is nested when the most species-rich site contains all species, while less species-rich sites contain a proper subset of the species observed at all richer sites (Patterson & Atmar, 1986).  However, matrices of observed data contain unexpected absences (zeros within the triangle of ones) and unexpected presences (ones outside the triangle of ones).  A great deal of work has been done to identify the appropriate methods to determine if matrices are more nested than would be expected by chance (summarized in Ulrich & Gotelli, 2007; Ulrich et al., 2009).  If the matrices are more nested than expected by chance, ecologists can then attempt to determine what processes are generating the observed pattern.

Ordered extinction and colonization (Patterson and Atmar 1986) are considered to be the two dominant processes that could produce the nested subset pattern.  Ordered extinction could generate the pattern if all the species were originally present at all sites, and then went extinct in an ordered sequence.  Alternatively, ordered colonization could shape the pattern if dispersal limitations caused species to immigrate to sites in an ordered sequence.  Despite the dominance of ordered extinction and colonization as explanations for  nested subsets, a variety of other processes have also been proposed to explain the cause of the pattern, including nested habitats (Simberloff and Martin 1991),  periodic disturbance (Bloch et al. 2007), stress tolerance (Cook et al. 2004), and passive sampling (Cutler 1994).

While a system could be nested because the habitat is nested, this does not provide an explanation of why the habitat itself is nested.  A  more satisfying explanation of the nested subset pattern would explain why both the study community and the habitat are nested.  Because the idea of nested habitat provides a proximate rather than an ultimate explanation for nestedness, we will restrict our investigation to processes that could provide an ultimate explanation for the nested subset pattern.   Many of the processes that have been proposed as explanations for nested subsets are related to ordered colonization or extinction.  Periodic disturbances would modify community structure by producing extinctions or facilitating colonizations.  Different stress tolerance affects the ability of species to survive and reproduce under different environmental conditions.  At a site, the different abilities of species to tolerate specific environmental conditions affect both the probability that a species will be able to successfully colonize, and the probability that it will go extinct.  Therefore, these processes are special cases that explain how ordered colonization and extinction would function in a specific system.  Thus, ordered extinction and colonization are the major causal processes that seem to explain nestedness.  

Patterson and Brown (1991) developed a conceptual model that provided a set of conditions that would be necessary to observe nestedness with ordered extinction and colonization as the pattern generating mechanisms.  The first condition is that sites must be located within a single species pool with a common history.  The second assumption is that sites need to have similar environmental conditions.  The third condition is that species will have “a hierarchical organization of niche relationships” (Patterson & Brown, 1991; Fischer & Lindenmayer, 2005)  The Patterson and Brown model implicitly assumes the nested subset pattern is scale dependant by requiring conditions that are observed at small to intermediate scales.   

In addition, passive sampling as defined in the nested subset literature implicitly assumes that nestedness is scale dependant.  Passive sampling in the broad sense has been defined as a sampling problem caused by the species-area relationship (larger areas contain more species) (Connor and McCoy 1979, Bolger et al. 1991, Cutler 1994), as well as stochastic sampling from a single species pool (MacArthur and Wilson 1967, Connor and Simberloff 1979).  The nested subset literature has used passive sampling in the sense of Cutler (1994), which is based on the species-area relationship.  Several researchers have explicitly examined how passive sampling could produce the nested subset pattern, and observed that passive sampling can produce nestedness under the assumption of a single species pool (Bolger et al. 1991, Cutler 1994).   

While the pattern generating mechanisms for the nested subset pattern (ordered extinction, ordered colonization, and passive sampling) implicitly assume scale dependency, there has been little work testing whether the nested subset pattern is scale dependant.  Based on the conceptual model of Patterson and Brown (1991), we expect that the nested subset pattern will be scale dependant, such that we observe nestedness at the local and regional scales, which share similar environmental conditions and a single species pool, but not at a continental scale, which encompasses different environmental conditions and multiple species pools.   Based on the first and second conditions, if we expand the scale of our analysis to cover multiple species pools and sites with vastly different environmental conditions, such as would be observed at a continental scale, we would not expect to observe nestedness.  If species are not from the same species pool, they cannot occur at the same site.  A matrix constructed from sites with different source pools would have many unexpected presences and unexpected absences.  While there might be a pattern in the matrix, we would expect that we would not observe the nested subset pattern, due to the number of unexpected presences and unexpected absences.   If sites have different environmental conditions, some species will never occur at the same sites because they have different niche requirements.  If the sites are vastly different, the species lists for those sites could be completely different, thus the system would not be nested.  However, at local and regional scales, within a single species pool and with more similar environmental conditions among sites, we would expect that many species would be shared among sites, allowing nestedness to occur.  If the nested subset pattern is scale dependent so that nestedness is observed at the local and regional scales, but not at a continental scale, this would support the Patterson and Brown (1991) model, and would suggest that ordered extinction and colonization are major processes producing the nested subset pattern.

Ordered extinction and colonization are only expected to operate at local and regional scales, but not at a scale that crosses multiple species pools (continental) (Patterson and Atmar 1993). Passive sampling, as defined by Cutler(1994), is a potential mechanism if the condition of a single species pool is met.  If the nested subset pattern is not scale dependant, this would suggest that the currently proposed pattern generating mechanisms are not sufficient to produce the pattern at all scales.

       Save this for the discussion: Unordered extinction/ colonization operates at all scales. (mathematical model presented by He et al. 2005- The Local-Regional Relationship: Immigration, Extinction, and Scale- might work- will probably need to present a good logical argument for why we would expect stochastic extinction and colonization to produce the nested subset pattern at a continental scale- this might be the time to reformulate passive sampling)

 

### Methods

We used the 2003 North American Breeding Bird Survey data set (BBS) for the conterminous United States to create the matrices used in the analyses (Sauer et al., 2007).  We excluded species from the dataset that were coded as unidentified, hybrids, or those that were only identified to genus.  Subspecies of the same species were coded under the parent species.

           To examine if nestedness was scale dependant, we decided to use a nested sampling design, as is used for species-area relationships in mainland systems.  We started with a single site, and then aggregated sites together as we increased the distance from the starting site.   In order to assemble matrices that could be replicated, we constructed a grid of fifty-nine points in a stratified sampling design to provide seed points for the smallest scale of analysis.  The BBS routes were assigned to each seed point based on the Euclidean distance from the route to the seed point (Fig. 1).  Within a single route, each route contained a total of 50 stops.  We treated each stop as a separate site for the smallest scale of our analysis, using the route as the extent of our matrix.  The routes used for the within route scale were the routes that had the closest Euclidean distances to the seed points, with one route selected per seed point.  Increasing scale, we used a 50 km radius from the seed point as the extent of our matrices.  For the 50 km scale, we treated routes as sites, rather than using the stops within routes as sites.  We also constructed matrices at 100 km, 150 km, and 200 km distance from the seed point, following the same procedure as for the 50 km radius.  For the 50 km, 100 km, 150 km, and 200 km scale, we constructed matrices with all the routes within a given radius from the seed point, as long as the scale contained a minimum of six routes (sites).  With fewer than six sites, it would be unlikely that we would be able to detect nestedness if it was present.  We also constructed matrices with six randomly selected routes within a given radius from the seed point, to standardize the number of routes (sites) in a matrix at a given scale of analysis.

           200 km was the largest radius that we could obtain without overlapping with sites that were closer to another seed point.  At distances greater than 200 km from the seed point, we increased our scale of analysis by grouping routes together using a nearest neighbor algorithm.  The initial clustered matrices were constructed using six randomly selected routes within a distance of 200 km from the seed point, and grouping those six together with six routes from another seed point.  Clustered matrices for larger scales were formed by grouping together clusters from smaller scales.  We did not create a matrix containing all of the seed points because of computational limitations.

#### Nested subset analysis

For our analyses, we used procedures that preserved the species and site labels of the rows and columns, sorted the matrices based on independent variables (Lomolino, 1996), or by incidence and species richness, and allowed us to use a metric and null model of our choice (Ulrich & Gotelli, 2007).  Monte Carlo simulations were performed by randomizing the observed data matrix 10,000 times.  The probability that the matrix was more nested than random chance was estimated for each expected matrix by dividing the number of times the simulated metric value of the randomized matrices were less than or equal to the observed metric value by the total number of randomizations (Patterson & Atmar, 1986).

           Ulrich and Gotelli (2007) concluded that the fixed-fixed null model in combination with the metrics N1 or BR should be the preferred choice for nestedness analyses.  However, the fixed-fixed model has low statistical power and maintains row and column totals (Ulrich & Gotelli, 2007).   Because of these issues with the fixed-fixed null model, we used the null model Random 1, which provides a good balance between type 1 and type 2 errors (Find citation).  The Random 1 model was a good choice for the purpose of our study because it keeps the total number of species occurrences constant, while allowing those occurrences to be randomized across sites (Patterson & Atmar, 1986).  Ulrich et al.’s (2009) results indicated that the combination of Random 1 and N0 performed well in combination.  N0 is calculated by counting the total number of unexpected absences.  An unexpected absence is defined as any site where a species is absent that is more species rich than the least species rich site at which it occurs (Patterson & Atmar, 1986).    Might think about putting in a bit justifying why we did not choose NODF- NODF was not compared in the consumer’s guide to nestedness.  While it was tested in subsequent papers, it was not tested in a way that allowed us to evaluate how it performed relative to the top metric and null model combination of the consumer’s guide.

           To determine if nestedness was scale dependant, we examined the number of matrices that were nested and not nested at different scales.  We further examined how nestedness changed with scale by examining how nested the matrices were relative to each other.  N0, like most nested subset metrics, is sensitive to the total number of elements in the matrix (matrix size) (Ulrich & Gotelli, 2007).  We corrected for the effect of matrix size by dividing the raw metric, N0, by the total number of elements in the matrix to obtain a size-corrected nestedness metric.  The corrected metric was graphed against geographic scale to examine how the degree of nestedness changed with scale.  If sites need to have similar environmental conditions and a single species pool for nestedness to occur, we would expect to observe nestedness at small to intermediate spatial scales, but would not observe nestedness at the largest spatial scales.  When graphically comparing the residuals of the metric values to geographic scale, to determine how nestedness is affected by scale, we would expect that residual values would increase with increasing scale (higher residual values indicating more unexpected absences).  Significance was set at 0.05 for all statistical analyses.  

### Results

Nestedness occurred at all scales, but the proportion of sites that were significantly nested varied with scale.  At the smallest scales,  n percent a majority of the routes were not nested, while at the largest scales, all routes were nested (Table 1).  To examine the degree of nestedness, we graphed the size corrected N0 against scale (Fig. 2).  Rewrite this bit according to the new graph.  Matrices that were not nested tended to have higher residual values than nested matrices indicating that nested matrices have fewer unexpected absences than non-nested matrices (Fig. 2).  Residual values initially decreased as scale increased, and then increased at the largest scales, indicating that unexpected absences decreased and then increased with scale (Fig. 2).

### Discussion

We observed that the nested subset pattern did not appear to be scale dependant, counter to our expectations.

Conceptual model does not appear to be supported, given that we do not observe the implied scale dependence.

Keep most of the discussion, I think, with maybe a bit more on how scale invariance of the pattern can point us to what potential processes might be operating.

We observed that the nested subset pattern did not appear to be scale dependant, counter to our expectations.  Our data do not support the Patterson and Brown (1991) conceptual model, given that we do not observe the implied scale dependance.  This suggests that the assumptions of similar environmental conditions and a single species pool are not neccessary for nestedness.   

     Similar environmental conditions and a single species pool are only observed at small spatial scales.  These assumptions and much of the prior work on nested subsets presume that processes operating on a local scale (ordered colonization and extinction) are the important factors that result in the observed community structure, i.e., nestedness.  However, both local scale processes and regional processes are important factors that produce community structure (Ricklefs, 1987; White and Hurlbert, 2010).  In our study, ordered extinction and colonization are not directly acting at the largest spatial scales, although the sum of localized extinctions and colonizations (stochastic colonization and extinction) throughout a geographic region can influence community structure at a site.  Sites were also less likely to be nested at a local scale than at regional scales.  This indicates that the potential causes of the nested subset pattern may need to be reexamined with mechanisms that operate at local and regional scales.

           The identification of a pattern does not mean that a process is implied, although identification of process is the ultimate goal (Lawton 1999).  Leibold and Mikkelson (2002) proposed a method for classifying different metacommunity patterns (e.g. nestedness) and emphasized that pattern identification does not necessarily imply a process.  Contrary to the suggestions of Leibold and Mikkelson (2002), the nested subset pattern has been used recently as a metric to allow inference about how species loss (extinction) influences community structure because the processes that produce the nested subset pattern (ordered extinction) were thought to be well understood (Presley et al., 2010; Dobrovolski et al., 2011; Novak et al., 2011).  If the processes producing the nested subset pattern are clear, this would be a reasonable assumption.  However, our research suggests that the assumptions thought to be necessary to produce nestedness are not necessary to produce nestedness, indicating that while we can identify the nested subset pattern, the processes that produce the pattern are still in question.  Because the nested subset pattern could be produced by factors other than ordered extinction, the practice of using the nested subset pattern as a community metric to identify processes of community assembly should be reconsidered.

          We examined the scale dependance of the nested subset pattern.  Because we did not observe scale dependance, we did not find support for the Patterson and Brown (1991) that provided a conceptual link between the nested subset pattern and pattern generating mechanisms, indicating that this pattern is not as well understood as previously thought.  The Patterson and Brown (1991) model was developed presuming scale dependence, which allowed for the assumption that ordered extinction and colonization were the major processes generating the observed pattern.  However, since we have demonstrated that these assumptions are not necessary, the processes thought to generate the nested subset pattern need to be reconsidered.

